---
layout: page
title: Good Posts
permalink: /good-posts/
---


Here is a list of links to insights that I found really interesting. I will continue to add more, both old and new, and organize them into categories, over time (will limit it to under 100 links to maintain a level of restriction to what was most meaningful)

1. [Are RCTs a good way to do economics](https://someunpleasant.substack.com/p/real-chaos-today?utm_source=post-email-title&publication_id=261003&post_id=59956889&utm_campaign=email-post-title&isFreemail=true&r=9hzj0&triedRedirect=true&utm_medium=email) - I found this interesting because the concerns it articulates around RCTs parallel the ones I have with A/B testing.

2. [Developing a growth model + marketplace growth strategy](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AlTQ6O2qooI) - Some takeaways from this: 1)Retention is likely the most important growth metric 2)Retention is the hardest to move but core product levers such as depth of supply, interaction with supply matters more than growth levers like notificaitons 3)Early lifecycle experience is a good indicator of future retention (and so early intervention is more effective than when customers are about to churn). On a separate note, a common analytical failure mode: "Our best users do x, why can't we make others do the same". This generally does not work-the others have different intent/context. The goal would be to figure out where the value for "the others" lie. Regarding marketplace expansion, might make more sense to after adjacent/easier/network effect accentuating space compared to higher TAM. Also, product i.e. incredible E2E experience (atomic networks?) matters more than GTM investments in liquidity (@45:30). 


3. [Disrupting Disruption](https://every.to/divinations/disrupting-disruption-734208) - A thought provoking challenge to Clayton Christensen's Disruption Theory. I liked the use of concrete examples such as Uber, iPhone, Costco, Walmart, Southwest Airlines.

4. [What Strategy Questions are You Asking](https://rogermartin.medium.com/what-strategy-questions-are-you-asking-587d32239a48) - I appreciated this article for highlighting that "moat" is dynamic and ever-changing. The true advantage lies in being ahead enough to ask and answer questions that competitors are not yet in a position to think about. It also asserts that a data advantage is really a questions advantage and that data analysis without a hypothesis is just data mining. This really resonated with me because speaking from experience, it's easy to fool ourselves and others with numbers and charts, mistaking complexity or effort for meaning. But that is ultimately noise. The framing—the questions—is the most important thing.

5. [Publishers and the Smiling Curve](https://stratechery.com/2014/publishers-smiling-curve/) - This is where I first learned about the Smiling Curve. Ben Thompson's application of the framework to the publishing industry is an eye-opener, as it makes you consider the commonalities between seemingly disconnected industries.

6. [Don't Let Your North Star Metric Deceive You](https://brianbalfour.com/essays/north-star-metric-growth) - A great critique of the limitations of OMTM. Specifically it points out that North Star metrics are 1)Output metrics: too big, broad, not actionable. It's like a scoreboard for a game. (My wording: it just states the obvious in numerical terms, without any insight on what needs to be done) 2)Output metrics are lagging indicators. For instance if we are only paying attention to Revenue and not Product Usage Frequency by the paying customers, we will only come to know about product problems when the user churns when their subscription period is up. 3)It only captures one dimension of the business and overoptimizes at the expense of other dimensions - it doesn't account for tradeoffs (I remember this one by thinking of Instrumental Convergence/Paperclip Fallacy). For instance monetization at the expense of retention or exploitation (yet another movie sequel) at the expense of exploration (something novel and refreshing). One critique I have of this blog post is that while I appreciate it drawing a distinction between input and output metrics, some of the input metrics are only inputs with respect to the final output metric-they are not inputs i.e. actionable from the business perspective. Metrics such as "Bring users back more often" are intermediate metrics between actual business levers or inputs and desired final output.

7. [Don’t Become a Victim of One Key Metric](https://caseyaccidental.com/one-key-metric-victim) -  An example here reminded me of the Munger quote, 'Show me the incentive and I'll show you the outcome.' Grubhub and Seamless had similar businesses with very different key metrics. Grubhub optimized for revenue, while Seamless optimized for GMV. Consequently, Seamless would show restaurants in alphabetical order in their search results, while Grubhub sorted restaurants by the average commission they earned from orders. Another example discussed how Pinterest's metric ended up incentivizing the algorithm to show clickbait images, with the comment, 'The metrics make it appear that engagement is increasing. It might be, but it is an empty calorie form that will affect engagement in a very negative way over the long term.' This made me reflect on how I try to stay away from Instagram after consuming enough 'empty calories' there, leading to a step function change in my usage after a period of high activity.

8. [Complexity Convection](https://every.to/divinations/complexity-convection-765851) - This article stayed with me for its insights on the value of keeping products and businesses simple and the pressures and incentives that work against it.
